The Project Gutenberg eBook of Walled towns
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Walled towns

Author: Ralph Adams Cram

Release date: December 11, 2025 [eBook #77444]

Language: English

Original publication: Boston: Marshall Jones Company, 1919

Credits: Charlene Taylor, chenzw, and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WALLED TOWNS ***




  WALLED TOWNS

  BY

  RALPH ADAMS CRAM

  LITT.D., LL.D.

  [Illustration]

  BOSTON
  MARSHALL JONES COMPANY
  M D CCCC XX




  COPYRIGHT, 1919
  BY MARSHALL JONES COMPANY

  _All rights reserved_

  First Printing, September, 1919
  Second Printing, February, 1920


  THE UNIVERSITY PRESS, CAMBRIDGE, U. S. A.




WALLED TOWNS




PROLOGUE


The stone-flagged path on the top of the high walls winds along within
the battlemented parapet, broken here and there by round turrets,
steeple-crowned barriers of big timbers and, at wider intervals, great
towers, round or square or many-sided, where bright banners blow in
the unsullied air. From one side you may look down on and into the
dim city jostling the ramparts with crowding walls and dizzy roofs,
from the other the granite scarp drops sheer to the green fields and
vari-coloured gardens and shadowy orchards full forty feet below.

Within, the city opens up in kaleidoscopic vistas as you walk slowly
around the walls: here are the steep roofs of tall houses with delicate
dormers, fantastic chimney stacks, turret cupolas with swinging weather
vanes; here the closed gardens of rich burgesses, full of arbours,
flowers, pleached alleys of roses, _espaliers_ of pear and nectarine;
here a convent or guild chapel, newly worked of yellow stone and all
embroidered with the garniture of niches, balustrades, pinnacles.
Here, under one of the city gates, opens a main street, narrow and
winding but walled with high-gabled houses, each story jutting beyond
the lower, carved from pavement to ridge like an Indian jewel casket,
and all bedecked with flaming colour and burnished gold-leaf. Below
is the stream and eddy of human life; craftsmen in the red and blue
and yellow of their guild liveries, slow-pacing merchants and burghers
in furred gowns of cramoisy and Flemish wool and gold-woven Eastern
silks; scholars in tippet and gown, youths in slashed doublets and gay
hose, grey friars and black and brown, with a tonsured monk or two,
and perhaps a purple prelate, attended, and made way for with deep
reverence. Threading the narrow road rides a great lady on a gaily
caparisoned palfrey, with an officious squire in attendance, or perhaps
a knight in silver armour, crested wonderfully, his emblazoned shield
hanging at his saddle-bow,--living colour mixing and changing between
leaning walls of still colour and red gold.

Here a stream or canal cuts the houses in halves, a quay with gay
booths and markets of vari-coloured vegetables along one side, walls of
pink brick or silvery stone on the other, jutting oriels hanging over
the stream, and high, curved bridges, each with its painted shrine,
crossing here and there, with gaudy boats shoving along underneath.
Here a square opens out, ringed with carved houses,--a huge guild hall
on one side, with its dizzy watch-tower where hang the great alarum
bells; long rows of Gothic arches, tall mullioned windows, and tiers
and ranges of niched statues all gold and gules and azure, painted
perhaps by Messer Jan Van Eyck or Messer Hans Memling. In the centre
is a spurting fountain with its gilt figures and chiselled parapet,
and all around are market booths with bright awnings where you may buy
strange things from far lands, chaffering with dark men from Syria and
Saracen Spain and Poland and Venice and Muscovy.

And everywhere, tall in the midst of tall towers and spires, vast,
silvery, light as air yet solemn and dominating, the great shape of
the Cathedral, buttressed, pinnacled, beautiful with rose windows and
innumerable figures of saints and angels and prophets.

There is no smoke and no noxious gas; the wind that sweeps over the
roofs and around the delicate spires is as clean and clear as it is
in the mountains; the painted banners flap and strain, and the trees
in the gardens rustle beneath. There is no sound except human sound;
the stir and murmur of passing feet, the pleasant clamour of voices,
the muffled chanting of cloistered nuns in some veiled chapel, the
shrill cry of street venders and children, and the multitudinous bells
sounding for worship in monastery or church and, at dawn and noon and
evening, the answering clangour of each to all for the Angelus.

And from the farther side of the walls a wide country of green and
gold and the far, thin blue of level horizon or distant mountains.
There are no slums and no suburbs and no mills and no railway yards;
the green fields and the yellow grain, the orchards and gardens and
thickets of trees sweep up to the very walls, slashed by winding white
roads. Alongside the river, limpid and unstained, are mills with slow
wheels dripping quietly, there where the great bridge with its seven
Gothic arches and its guarding towers curves in a long arc from shore
to shore. Far away is perhaps a grey monastery with its tall towers,
and on the hill a greyer castle looming out of the woods. Along the
road blue-clad peasants come and go with swaying flocks of sheep and
fowl and cattle. Here are dusty pilgrims with staff and wallet and
broad hats, pursy merchants on heavy horses with harness of red velvet
and gold embroidery; a squadron of mounted soldiers with lances and
banners, and perhaps my Lord Bishop on his white mule, surrounded by
his retainers, and on progress to his see city from some episcopal
visitation; perhaps even a plumed and visored knight riding on quest or
to join a new Crusade to the Holy Land.

Colour everywhere, in the fresh country, in the carven houses, in
gilded shrines and flapping banners, in the clothes of the people like
a covey of vari-coloured tropical birds. No din of noise, no pall of
smoke, but fresh air blowing within the city and without, even through
the narrow streets, none too clean at best, but cleaner far than they
were to be thereafter and for many long centuries to come.

Such was any walled town in the fifteenth century, let us say in
France or England or Italy, in Flanders or Spain or the Rhineland.
Carcassonne, Rothenbourg, San Gimignano, Oxford, ghosts of the past,
arouse hauntings of memory today, but they tell us little, for the
colour is gone, and the stillness and the clean air. Ghosts they are
and not living things; and life, colour, clarity, these were the
outward marks of the Walled Towns of the Middle Ages.

       *       *       *       *       *

“It was not a pretty station where McCann found himself, and he glared
ill-naturedly around with restless, aggressive eyes. The brick walls,
the cheaply grained doors bearing their tarnished legends, “Gents,”
“Ladies,” “Refreshment Saloon,” the rough raftered roof over the
tracks,--everything was black and grimy with years of smoke, belching
even now from the big locomotive, and gathering like an ill-conditioned
thunder-cloud over the mob of scurrying, pushing men and women, a mob
that swelled and scattered constantly in fretful confusion. A hustling
business-man with a fat, pink face and long sandy whiskers, his silk
hat cocked on one side in grotesque assumption of jauntiness, tripped
over the clay-covered pick of a surly labourer, red of face and sweaty,
blue of overalls and mud-coloured of shirt, and as he stumbled over the
annoying implement scowled coarsely, and swore, with his cigar between
his teeth.

“Ragged and grimy children, hardly old enough to walk, sprawled
and scrambled on the dirty platform, and as McCann hurried by, a
five-year-old cursed shrilly a still more youthful little tough,
who answered in kind. Vulgar theatre-bills in rank reds and yellows
flaunted on the cindery walls; discarded newspapers, banana skins,
cigar butts, and saliva were ground together vilely under foot by the
scuffling mob. Dirt, meanness, ugliness everywhere--in the unhappy
people no less than in their surroundings....

“The prospect was not much better outside than in. The air was thick
with fine white dust, and dazzling with fierce sunlight. On one side
was a wall of brick tenements, with liquor saloons, cheap groceries,
and a fish-market below, all adding their mite to the virulence of
the dead, stifling air. Above, men in dirty shirt-sleeves lolled out
of the grimy windows, where long festoons of half-washed clothes
drooped sordidly. On the other side, gangs of workmen were hurriedly
repairing the ravages of a fire that evidently had swept clear a large
space in its well-meant but ineffectual attempts at purgation. Gaunt
black chimneys wound with writhing gas-pipes, tottering fragments of
wall blistered white on one side, piles of crumbling bricks where men
worked sullenly loading blue carts, mingled with new work, where the
walls, girdled with yellow scaffolding, were rising higher, uglier than
before; the plain factory walls with their rows of square windows less
hideous by far than those buildings where some ignorant contractor was
trying by the aid of galvanized iron to produce an effect of tawdry,
lying magnificence. Dump-carts, market-waggons, shabby hacks, crawled
or scurried along in the hot dust. A huge dray loaded with iron bars
jolted over the granite pavement with a clanging, clattering din that
was maddening. In fact, none of the adjuncts of a thriving, progressive
town were absent, so far as one could see....

“The carriage threaded its way through the roaring crowd of vehicles,
passing the business part of the city, and entering a tract given over
to factories, hideous blocks of barren brick and shabby clapboards,
through the open windows of which came the brain-killing whir of heavy
machinery, and hot puffs of oily air. Here and there would be small
areas between the buildings where foul streams of waste from some
factory of cheap calico would mingle dirtily with pools of green,
stagnant water, the edges barred with stripes of horrible pinks and
purples where the water had dried under the fierce sun. All around
lay piles of refuse,--iron hoops, broken bottles, barrels, cans,
old leather stewing and fuming in the dead heat, and everywhere
escape-pipes vomiting steam in spurts. Over it all was the roar of
industrial civilization. McCann cast a pitying look at the pale,
dispirited figures passing languidly to and fro in the midst of the din
and the foul air, and set his teeth closely.

“Presently they entered that part of the city where live the poor, they
who work in the mills, when they are not on strike, or the mills are
not shut down,--as barren of trees or grass as the centre of the city,
the baked grey earth trodden hard between the crowded tenements painted
lifeless greys, as dead in colour as the clay about them. Children and
goats crawled starvedly around or huddled in the hot shadow of the
sides of the houses. This passed, and then came the circle of “suburban
residences,” as crowded almost as the tottering tenements, but with
green grass around them. Frightful spectacles these,--“Queen Anne” and
“Colonial” vagaries painted lurid colours, and frantic in their cheap
elaboration. Between two affected little cottages painted orange and
green and with round towers on their corners, stood a new six-story
apartment-house with vulgar front of brown stone, “Romanesque” in
style, but with long flat sides of cheap brick. McCann caught the
name on the big white board that announced “Suites to let.” “Hotel
Plantagenet,” and grinned savagely.

“Then, at last, even this region of speculative horrors came to an end,
giving place to a wide country road that grew more and more beautiful
as they left the town far behind. McCann’s eyebrows were knotted in a
scowl. The ghastly nonsense, like a horrible practical joke, that the
city had been to him, excited, as it always did, all the antagonism
within his rebellious nature. Slowly and grimly he said to himself,
yet half aloud, in a tone of deliberation, as though he were cursing
solemnly the town he had left: ‘I hope from my soul that I may live to
see the day when that damned city will be a desolate wilderness; when
those chimneys shall rise smokeless; when those streets shall be stony
valleys between grisly ridges of fallen brick; when Nature itself shall
shrink from repairing the evil that man has wrought; when the wild
birds shall sweep widely around that desolation that they may not pass
above; when only rats and small snakes shall crawl though the ruin of
that “thriving commercial and manufacturing metropolis”; when the very
name it bore in the days of its dirty glory shall have become a synonym
for horror and despair!’ Having thus relieved himself he laughed
softly, and felt better.”[A]

[A] “The Decadent,” 1893.




I


What is the way out? The question that was universal during the war,
“How has this thing come?” gives place to the other that is no less
poignant and no less universal, “What is the way out?” There must be
a way; this coil of uttermost confusion must be solvable, must be
solved--_if only we knew the way!_ There can be no going back, of that
we are sure, and the industry of the serious-minded men, busy with set
faces and a brave optimism, in their cheerful efforts to restore the
old course of events after an accidental interlude, fills us with a
kind of shame that people who have lived through the war should have
learned so little both of the war and from it. Four years have ended
the work of four centuries and--there is no going back. “Finis” has
been written at the end of a long episode and there is no way by which
we can knit together again the strands that are severed forever. There
is even less desire than ability. It does not show very well in the
red light of war, that act in the great world-drama that opened with
the dissolution of Mediævalism and the coming of the Renaissance; that
developed through the Reformation, the revolutions of the eighteenth
century and the sequent industrialism, to its climax and catastrophe
in war. There is little in it we would have back if we could, but the
unstable equilibrium in which we hang for the moment, poised between
reactionism and universal anarchy, cannot last; already the balance
is inclining towards chaos, and in the six months that will intervene
between the writing of this and its publication it may very well be
that the decision of inertia will be made and the plunge effected that
will bring us down into that unintelligent repetition of history now so
clearly indicated in Russia, Austria, Germany. We can neither return
nor remain but--would we go on, at least along the lines that are at
present indicated? Are we tempted by the savage and stone-age ravings
and ravenings of Bolshevism? Have we any inclination towards that
super-imperialism of the pacifist-internationalist-Israelitish “League
of Free Nations” that comes in such questionable shape? Does State
Socialism with all its materialistic mechanisms appeal to us? Other
alleviation is not offered and in these we can see no encouragement.

It is the eternal dilemma of the Two Alternatives, which is
nevertheless no more than a vicious sophism: “Either you will take this
or you must have that,” the starling-cry of partizan politics by which
“democracies” have lived. In all human affairs there are never only
two alternatives, there is always a third and sometimes more; but this
unrecognized alternative never commands that popular leadership which
“carries the election,” and it does not appeal to a public that prefers
the raw obviousness of the extremes. Yet it is the third alternative
that is always the right one, except when the God-made leaders, the
time having come for a new upward rush of the vital force in society,
put themselves in the vanguard of the new advance and lift the world
with them, as it were by main force. Reactionism or Bolshevism: “Under
which king, Bezonian? Speak or die!” We are told that the old world
of before-the-war must be restored in its integrity or we must fall
a victim to the insane anarchy of a proletariat in revolt, and for
many of us there is little to choose between the two. We have seen how
fragile, artificial and insecure is civilization, how instantly and
hopelessly it can crumble into a sort of putrid dissolution the moment
its conventions are challenged and the ultimate principles of democracy
are put in practice, and we do not like it. We have seen Russia,
Germany, Hungary, and sporadic but disquieting examples in every State,
no matter how conservative it may be or how successful in a first
stamping out of the flame. On the other hand, we saw the triumph of
“Modern Civilization” in the twenty-five years preceding the Great
War, and as we realize now what it was, through the revelations it has
made of itself during the last five years, we like it quite as little
as the other. We see it now as an impossible farrago of false values,
of loud-mouthed sentimentality and crude, cold-blooded practices; of
gross, all-pervading injustice sicklied o’er with the pale cast of
smug humanitarianism; a democracy of form that was without ideal or
reality in practice; imperialism, materialism and the quantitative
standard. Is there no alternative other than this, restored in its
unvarying ugliness of fact and of manifestation, or the imitative era
of a new Dark Ages which will be brought to pass by the new hordes of
Huns and Vandals that again, after fifteen centuries, menace a greater
Imperialism than Rome with an identical fate? There _is_ a third
alternative; there may be more, but the one which makes its argument
for acceptance on the basis of history and experience is here put
forward for consideration.

In three books already published in this series which has been issued
from time to time during the Great War--“The Nemesis of Mediocrity,”
“The Great Thousand Years” and “The Sins of the Fathers”--I have tried
to determine certain of the causes which led to the tragical _débâcle_
of modern civilization at the very moment of its highest supremacy;
and now while mediocrity pitifully struggles to meet and solve an
avalanche of problems it cannot cope withal, and anarchy, like Alaric
and Attila and Genseric at the head of their united hosts, beat against
the dissolving barriers of a forlorn and impotent and discredited
culture, I would try to find some hints of the saving alternative, and
if possible discover some way out of the deadly _impasse_ in which the
world finds itself.

From “The Nemesis of Mediocrity” it should be sufficiently clear
that I do not believe that any mechanical devices whatever will
serve the purpose: neither the buoyant plan to “make the world safe
for democracy,” nor any extension and amplification of “democratic”
methods onward to woman’s suffrage or direct legislation or proletarian
absolutism through Russian soviets, nor socialistic panaceas varying
from a mild collectivism to Marxism and the _Internationale_, nor a
league of nations and an imposing but impotent “Covenant,” nor even
a world-wide “League to Enforce Peace.” We have heard something too
much of late of peace, and not enough of justice; peace is not an end
in itself, it is rather a by-product of justice. Through justice the
world can attain peace, but through peace there is no guaranty that
justice may be achieved. There must always be the material enginery
through the operation of which the ideal is put into practice, but in
the ideal lies the determining force, whether for good or evil, and by
just so far as this is right in its nature will the mechanism operate
for good ends. The best agent in the world, even the Catholic Church or
the American Republic, may be employed towards evil and vicious ends
whenever the energizing force is of a nature that operates towards
darkness and away from the light.

I have tried in “The Sins of the Fathers,” to prove that the marks of
degeneracy and constructive evil in the modernism that went to its
ruin during the Great War, and is now accomplishing its destiny in
the even more tragical epoch of after-the-war, are its imperialism,
its materialism and its quantitative standard--that is to say, its
acceptance of the gross aggregate in place of the unit of human scale,
its standard of values which rejected the passion for perfection in
favour of the numerical equivalent, and its denial of spirit as a
reality rather than a mere mode of material action--while the only
salvation for society is to be found in the restoration, in all things,
of small human units, the testing of all things by value not bulk, and
the acceptance once more of the philosophy of sacramentalism.

It would be possible, I suppose, to develop a detailed scheme for the
reconstruction of the world along certain definite lines that would
be in accordance with these principles, but the question would at
once arise, How could it be made to work? Frankly, the question is
unanswerable except by a categorical negative. The nineteenth-century
superstition that life proceeds after an inevitable system of
progressive evolution, so defiant of history, so responsible in great
degree for the many delusions that made the war not only possible but
inevitable, finds few now to do it honour. The soul is not forever
engaged in the graceful industry of building for itself ever more
stately mansions; it is quite as frequently employed in defiling and
destroying those already built, and in substituting the hovel for
the palace. It is not even, except at infrequent intervals, desirous
of improving its condition. As a whole, man is not an animal that
is eager for enlightenment that it may follow after the right. At
certain crescent periods in the long process of history, when great
prophets and leaders are raised up, it is forced, even against its
will, to follow after the leaders when once the prophets have been
conscientiously stoned, and great and wonderful things result--Athens,
Rome, Byzantium, Venice, Sicily, the cities of the Middle Ages,
Flanders, Elizabethan England--but the untoward exertion is its own
executioner, and always society sinks back into some form of barbarism
from whence all is to be begun again.

Nor is education--free, universal, secular and “efficient”--an
universal panacea for this persistent disease of backsliding; it is not
even a palliative or a prophylactic. The most intensive educational
period ever known had issue in the most preposterous war in history,
initiated by the most highly and generally educated of all peoples, by
them given a new content of disgrace and savagery, and issuing at last
into Bolshevism and an obscene anarchy that would be ridiculous but
for the omnipresent horror. And the same is true both of industrialism
and democracy, for both have belied the promises of their instigators
and have brought in, not peace and plenty and liberty, but universal
warfare, outrageous poverty, and the tyranny of the ignorant and the
unfit.

Before the revelations of war, while the curious superstitions of
the nineteenth century were still in vogue, it was widely held that
evolution, education and democracy were irresistible, and that progress
from then on must be continuous and by arithmetical if not geometrical
progression. When the war came and the revelations began to unfold
themselves, it was held with equal comprehensiveness that even if our
civilization had been an illusion, our trinity of mechanistic saviours
but a bundle of broken reeds, the war itself would prove a great
regenerative agency, and that out of its fiery purgation would issue
forth a new spirit that would redeem the world. It is a fair question
to ask whether those that once saw this bow of promise in the red skies
have found the gold at the rainbow’s end or are now even sure the
radiance itself has not faded into nothingness.

Every great war exhibits at least two phenomena following on from
its end: the falling back into an abyss of meanness, materialism and
self-seeking, with the swift disappearance of the spiritual exaltation
developed during the fight, and the emergence sooner or later of
isolated personalities who have retained the ardour of spiritual
regeneration, who seem indeed to epitomize it within themselves,
and who struggle, sometimes with success, sometimes with failure, to
bring the mass of people back to their lost ideals and embody these
in a better type of society. Apparently success or failure depends on
whether the particular war in question came on the rise or the fall of
the rhythmical curve that conditions all history.

At the present moment the first of these two phenomena has shown
itself. Whether it is in Russia or in the fragments of the despoiled
Central Empires where the ominous horror of Bolshevism riots in a
carnival of obscene destruction, or in the governments and “interests”
and amongst the peoples of the Allies, there is now, corporately, no
evidence of anything but a general break-down of ideals, and either an
accelerating plunge into something a few degrees worse than barbarism,
with the Dark Ages as its inevitable issue, or an equally fatal return
to the altogether hopeless, indeed the pestilential, standards and
methods of the fruition of modernism in the world-before-the-war. The
new warfare is between these, the malignant old Two Alternatives; fear
of one encompasses the other, and in each case all that is done is
with the terror of Bolshevism conditioning all on the one hand, terror
of reactionism on the other. Expediency, desperate self-preservation,
is the controlling passion, and the principles of justice, right and
reason are no longer operative.

As this is written there is no sure indication as to which of these
alternatives is to prevail, but it is for the moment quite clearly
indicated that it will be the one or the other,--either the tyranny
of the degraded, Bolshevism, universal anarchy, with the modernist
reversal of all values succeeded by the post-modernist destruction
of all values, or the triumph of reaction, with a return to the
world-before-the-war for a brief period of profligate excess along
all materialistic, intellectual and scientific lines not unlike the
Restoration period of Charles II, with the same ruin achieved in the
end though after a certain interlude. And yet the third alternative
is theoretically possible: escape from the Scylla and Charybdis of
error through the opportune development of the second phenomenon, the
reasonable certainty of which is indicated by history--the appearance
of those leaders of vision and power who had been generated through
the alchemy of war.

That in the end they will come we need not doubt, but in the meantime
an errant world, leaderless and ungoverned, is urged swiftly on towards
catastrophe of either one sort or another, nor will it wait the coming
of the indispensable leaders. It is not from the men whose potential
greatness was perfected and revealed by war, Cardinal Mercier, for
example, or Marshal Foch, great leaders absolutely of the first
class, that solution is to be sought, for in their age is sufficient
inhibition. It is rather from those whose character has actually
been made by war, youths perhaps, who have fought and found, either
in the armies or the navies or in the air, or even in some of the
non-combatant branches of the Service. Boys they are now, perhaps, in
years, but into them has been poured the energizing power that leads to
mastership; to them is given the first fire of progressive revelation.
Somewhere, in the still active units, on the way back to their homes
and to civil life, or already mingled in the activities from which they
were called for their great testing, are those who sooner or later
will find themselves the leaders of the quest for a new life for the
world. The Divine finger-touch has been granted them, the spark of
inspiration has lightened in their souls, but seldom is the generation
swift; it may be years before it is effected, and meanwhile only the
Two Alternatives remain.

For my own purpose in this book, perhaps indeed so far as society
itself is concerned, it is a matter of indifference which is the
victor in the fight for supremacy; the ultimate issue will be the
same though the roads are various. Universal beastliness issuant of
Russia, or universal materialism _redivivus_, the conditions of life
will be intolerable, and in the end a new thing will be built up as
different on the one hand to anarchy as on the other it is different
to the industrial-democratic-materialist _régime_ of the immediate
past. With the former we are assured some five hundred years not unlike
those that followed the fall of Rome; with the latter we at least are
given the respite of a brief Restoration, during which the war-bred
potencies may mature, and at the end of the few gross years which would
be allotted to this _status quo ante_-civilization, become operative
to avert the horror of a recrudescent Bolshevism. At least so we
may hope; on the other hand it may be doubted whether, after all, a
revived and intensified materialism such as that which the reactionary
element is attempting, would not afford an even less favourable and
stimulating soil for fostering the possible war-potentialities than
would red anarchy, for the suffocating qualities of gross luxuriance
are sometimes more fatal than the desperate sensations of danger,
adversity and shame. In any case, the immediate future is not one to
be anticipated with enthusiasm or confidence and we shall do well
to consider the course to be followed by those who reject the Two
Alternatives and refuse to have any part in either.




II


It is not my intention to write another in the long list of Utopias
with which man has amused himself, from Plato to H. G. Wells. Where the
preceding volumes in this series have been frankly destructive, I would
make this volume constructive, if only by suggestion. It is in no sense
a programme, it is still less an effort at establishing an ideal. Let
us call it “a way out,” for it is no more than this; not “the” way,
nor yet a way to anything approaching a perfect State, still less a
perfect condition of life, but rather a possible issue out of a present
_impasse_ for some of those who, as I have said, peremptorily reject
both of the intolerable alternatives now offered them.

What I have to propose is based on acceptance, at least substantially,
of the criticisms of modernism that appear in “The Nemesis of
Mediocrity” and in “The Sins of the Fathers”; it also assumes the
general accuracy of the interpretation of history attempted in
“The Great Thousand Years,” and the estimate of certain historic
religio-social forces therein described. To those who dissent from
these opinions this volume will contain nothing and they will be well
advised if they pursue it no further. Since it is written for those
who have done me the honour to read these previous books, I shall not
try to epitomize them here, assuming as I do a certain familiarity
with their general argument. All that it is necessary to say is that
the assumption is made that “modern civilization” was essentially
an inferior product; that it could have had no other issue than
precisely such a war as occurred; that its fundamental weaknesses
were its imperialism, its materialism and its quantitative standard;
that the particular type of “democracy” for which the world was to
be made safe was and is a menace to righteous society, since it had
lowered and reversed all standards, established the reign of the
venal, the incapable and the unfit, and had destroyed all competent
leadership while preventing its generation, and that the only visible
hope of recovery lay in a restoration of the unit of human scale, the
passion for perfection, and a certain form of philosophy known as
sacramentalism, with the precedents of the monastic method used as a
basis of operation, and the whole put in process through the leadership
of great captains of men such as always in the past have accomplished
the building up of society after cataclysms similar to that which
during five years has brought modernism to an end.

Society is no longer to be dealt with as an unit, nor even as a
congeries of units; it is a chaos, both as a whole and in each
moiety thereof. The evolutionary process, if it ever existed, is now
inoperative, and something more nearly approaching devolution has
taken its place. As under the earlier assault of the everlasting
barbarian the great, imperial unity of Rome broke up into minute
family fragments, and as the pseudo-unity of the Holy Roman Empire
broke up into a myriad of heterogeneous states, so our own world,
both political and social, is deliquescing into its elements, and no
ingenious mechanism, however cleverly devised, can arrest the process
for more than the briefest of periods. When the mechanism breaks down,
whether it is a year or ten years hence, the interrupted process of
disintegration will continue to its appointed end.

Man has always nursed the dream of corporate regeneration, of the
finding or devising of some method or mechanism whereby society as
a whole could be redeemed _en bloc_. The dream has engendered many
revolutions but the results have been other than those anticipated,
and even these unexpected happenings have proved evanescent, with a
constant return to the old evils and abuses. Persistently the world
as a whole refuses regeneration. Latterly the ingenious device has
somewhat superseded the violent changing of things, and democracy with
its miscellaneous spawn of doctrinaire inventions, industrialism with
its facile subterfuges of political economy; evolution, education,
socialism, each in turn has offered itself as the sovereign elixir.
The war has quashed the major part, the following “peace” is dealing
with the remainder. The last device of all, socialism, whether of the
Marxian variety or of the Fabian sort, is now the most discredited
of all, for Bolshevism on the one hand, state ownership, control,
or management of industry on the other, have both proved, the one
intolerable, the other a bloody synonym for social extinction.

Yet the way out must be found by those for whom the present scheme of
existence is not good enough; for those who refuse to go back to the
pre-war _régime_ or on to the predicted era of anarchy. The way may
be found, but it will reveal itself not through wide and democratic
social processes but through group action in which the units are few in
number. The process will be one of withdrawal, of segregation, at first
even of isolation; but if this really proves to be the right way, the
end may be, as so often in the past, a centrifugal action developing
from one originally centripetal, with an ultimate leavening of the
whole lump.

It may be remembered that in “The Great Thousand Years” I endeavoured
to demonstrate the vibratory theory of history, whereby the life of
society is conditioned by a rhythmical wave motion; curves rising and
descending, inflexibly though with varying trajectories, the falling
curve meeting at some point the rising curve of a future coming
into being, the crossing points forming the nodes of history, and
spacing themselves at five-century intervals either side the birth
of Christ, or the year 1 A.D. In the same place I called attention to
the correspondence in time (since the Christian era) between certain
periodic manifestations of spiritual force, identical in nature though
somewhat varied in fashion, and these nodal points; that is to say,
the monastic idea as this showed itself in the first, sixth, eleventh
and sixteenth centuries. This synchronism may be graphically explained
thus, the thin line indicating the approximate curve of social
development, the shaded line the monastic manifestation:

[Illustration: A THE CURVE OF CIVILIZATION B THE CURVE OF MONASTICISM]

It would appear from this that now, while the next nodal point is
possibly seventy-five years in the future, the next manifestations of
monasticism should already be showing itself. The curve of modernism
is now descending as precipitously as did that of Roman Imperialism,
but already, to those who are willing to see, there are indisputable
evidences of the rising of the following curve. Whether this is to
emulate in lift and continuance the curves of Mediævalism and of
modernism, or whether it is to be but a poor copy of the sag and the
low, heavy lift of the Dark Ages, is the question that man is to
determine for himself during the next two generations.

Now as a matter of fact the last thirty years have shown an altogether
astonishing recrudescence of the monastic spirit, while already the war
has added enormously to its force and expansion. Thus far it has been
wholly along old-established lines, which was to be expected; but as we
approach nearer and nearer to the next nodal point of the year 2000,
we are bound to see a variant, a new expression of the indestructible
idea. This has always been the case. At the beginning of the Christian
era the impulse was personal, the individual was the unit, and the
result was the anchorites and hermits, each isolating himself in a
hidden mountain cave, a hut in the desert or, if his fancy took this
eccentric, on the top of a lonely column, like St. Simon Stylites.
With St. Benedict the group became the unit, a sort of artificial
family either of men or of women, as the case might be. He himself
began as a hermit in the cleft of a far mountain, but within his own
lifetime his original impulse was overridden and the new communal
or group life came into being, though each monastery or convent was
quite autonomous and self-contained. Five centuries later (or four,
to speak more exactly) began the Cluniac reform, which was followed
by the Cistercian movement, and here, though the old Benedictine mode
was followed at first, in a brief time came the differentiation, for
now all the houses of one order were united under a centralizing and
coördinating force. Here we have the State as the parallel of the new
scheme. Latest of all, in another five centuries, came still a new model,
the army, with the Society of Jesus as its perfect exponent. So we have
at almost exact five-century intervals four models of monasticism: the
individual, the family, the State and the army. A fifth is now due; what
will be its form?

It will, I think, be one in which the human family is made the unit. It
will not supersede the older modes but supplement them, for the monks,
canons-regular and friars, of the old tradition and the old line, will
be as necessary then as ever; instead it will be an amplification
of the indestructible idea, fitted to, and developing from, the new
conditions which confront society. In addition to the groups of either
men or women, living in a community life apart, and vowed to poverty,
celibacy and obedience, there will be groups of natural families,
father, mother and children, entering into a communal but not by any
means “communistic” life, within those Walled Towns they will create
for themselves, in the midst of the world but not of it, where the
conditions of life will be determined after such sort as will make
possible that real and wholesome and joyful and simple and reasonable
living that has long been forbidden by the conditions of modern
civilization.

Let me explain at once that I have nothing in mind resembling in the
least the communistic schemes of Fourier, Owen, George; of the Shakers,
the Concord enthusiasts or their ilk. In these cases it was always
the unnatural element of communism that was their undoing, and in
the Walled Towns of the new era the preservation of individuality,
of private property, of family integrity, would be of necessity a
fundamental principle. Many evils and abuses have grown up around all
these, but I cannot claim that I am one of those (in spite of its wide
popularity and almost universal acceptance) who hold tenaciously to
the belief that the only way to get rid of the dust is to burn down
the house, or that the only way to correct a child’s faults is to kill
it. Rather I incline to the somewhat outworn method of reform without
destruction, and I lean to the opinion that there are enough others
of like convictions to make possible the creation of a certain number
of Walled Towns that the experiment may be put into effect, since
manifestly it is no longer possible in society as a whole.

The method would be simple, the process carried out quietly, and
preferably in several places at once. A certain community of interest
must be presupposed, but this would hardly extend beyond substantial
unity in religion, in philosophy and in a revolt against the
industrial-democratic-imperialist scheme of society which has dominated
Europe and America since the beginning of the nineteenth-century.
There can be no sane and wholesome society in the future where there
is not an universally accepted religion of perfectly definite form, a
clear, logical and convincing philosophy of life, and a social system
diametrically opposed to that which was current before the war and is
now striving desperately for a restoration. As the unity of religion
has been shattered since the sixteenth century, the creators of the
Walled Towns may very well be divided into individual groups, so far
as religion is concerned. I can imagine Roman Catholics forming the
nucleus of one, Episcopalians another, and it may be there are among
the Protestant denominations those who would be led along the same
lines. The essential point is the fundamental necessity for a vital and
common religion among those who go forward to the building of the new
social units. The same is true of philosophy, for this and religion can
never be separated except under pain of the results that have followed
the severance in the fifteenth century, and the workings of a world
void of any real philosophy ever since. If there is any philosophy
except sacramentalism which is at the same time intellectually
satisfying in a perfectly complete degree, consonant with the proved
results of scientific investigation and thought, and sufficiently
dynamic as a controlling force in life, I am not acquainted with it. If
such a thing exists, it might serve its turn, but false philosophies
such as materialism, evolutionism, Christian Science and pragmatism
are not working substitutes for a real philosophy such as that of
Hugh of St. Victor, Duns Scotus or St. Thomas Aquinas. As for the
social vision, there must be not only the negative quality of revolt
but the positive quality of construction. It is not sufficient to
hate the tawdry and iniquitous fabrications of the camp-followers of
democracy; the gross industrial-financial system of “big business”
and competition, with the capital _versus_ labour antithesis it has
bred. It is not enough to curse imperialism and materialism and the
quantitative standard. There must be some vision of the plausible
substitute, and while this must determine itself slowly, through many
failures, and will in the end appear as a by-product of the spiritual
regeneration that must follow once the real religion and a right
philosophy are achieved, there must be a starting somewhere.

Personally, I should say that for this starting point we might fix on
Justice (whichever way the sword cuts) as the first consideration;
Charity (or rather _Caritas_--the Latin is more exact) follows close
after, or even goes side by side. So do the other Cardinal Virtues; but
who has not invoked them in support of every reform, whether it was of
God or the devil? They fall as lightly from the lips of Marat or Lenine
as from those of Plato, Dante or Sir Thomas More; they may be assumed.
There are, however, certain less abstract propositions which it seems
to me must serve at least as a trial basis; these, for example:

Power is Divine in its origin, since it is an attribute of Divinity,
and its exercise is by Divine permission. It follows, therefore, that,
as was held during the Middle Ages, no man or group of men, neither
king nor boss nor parliament nor soviet, has any authority to exercise
power after a wrong fashion or to govern ill.

Society exists through coöperation, not through competition; the latter
must therefore be abolished, though this does not imply the destruction
of emulation, which is quite a different thing.

All men are equal before God and the Law but not otherwise.
Privilege, in the sense of immunity or of special opportunity without
corresponding obligations is abhorrent, but justice, self-interest and
the common good demand that those who _can_ do a thing well should do
it, those who cannot should be debarred. This applies to government or
legislation or the exercise of the electoral franchise, as well as to
education, medicine or the arts.

In industry of all kinds, production should be for use, not profit. The
paying of money for the use of money is questionable, both from the
standpoint of morals and of expediency. It may prove that the Church
was right during the Middle Ages in calling it all _usury_, and that
John Calvin, when he declared in its favour, was guilty of a crime.
In any case, the return on capital should be the fixed charge and
small in amount; the margin of profit belongs to those who produce,
whether they work with their brains or their hands. The holding of
land for dwelling and cultivation is essential for every family in any
wholesome society; this land should be sufficient to support the family
at necessity. Land belongs to the community, but tenure thereof on
the part of families or individuals is perpetual, and the land may be
bequeathed or transferred so long as the rent or taxes are duly paid.

Every community is in duty bound to guard its own integrity by
determining its own membership, but none once admitted can be expelled
except by process of law.

No society can endure when a false standard of comparative values
exists. At the present time about half the working male population in
Europe and America is engaged in producing or marketing things which
add nothing to the virtue, the real welfare, or the joy in life of man,
and for the most part he would be better off without them. There are as
many directly or indirectly engaged in getting rid of these essentially
useless products as there are in their manufacture. None of these men
produces anything, and they must be fed, housed and clothed by those
who do. It costs as much to market the surplus product as it does to
bring it into existence, and the consumer pays. The result is that
“labour-saving” machines have vastly increased the burden of labour;
the surplus product demands markets, and exploitation both of labour
and of markets becomes the foundation of industrial civilization. The
modern world has become a perfectly artificial fabric of complicated
indebtedness, the magnitude and ramifications of which are so enormous
that nothing preserves it but public confidence. Were this removed, or
even shaken seriously, the whole fabric would collapse in universal
bankruptcy, a situation even now indicated for all Europe, as may be
seen in Mr. Vanderlip’s remarkable book “What has Happened to Europe.”
It is to correct this silly artifice, to obliterate this preposterous,
wrong-headed and insecure way of life, that sooner or later men, women
and children will seek refuge in the Walled Towns they will build, as
they have gone, time out of mind, into the monasteries and convents of
religion which they built for their earlier refuge.




III


In the vision that I see of the coming Walled Towns, they may rise
anywhere, given only that there is sufficient arable land near by, a
river that will afford power, and a site with some elements of natural
beauty. They will grow from small beginnings,--a few families and
individuals at first, though the number must be sufficient to establish
the identity and the autonomy of the group. The members will be those
for whom the present type of social life is not good enough, either in
fact or in promise; men and women who think alike on a few essential
matters, who still maintain the standard of comparative values of the
world before modernism, and who wish to live simply, as happily as
possible, and to restore the lost ideals of justice, honour, chivalry
and brotherly coöperation. While fulfilling all their obligations to
government as it is now established--paying taxes, rendering military
service and jury duty, and voting in those occasional cases when there
is a remote chance of its doing any good--they will yet set up for
themselves a community, self-supporting in so far as this is possible,
with its own government, its educational system, its social organism
and its regulations controlling the mode of life of its members to the
extent that is necessary to carry out the fundamental principles of the
association.

The phrase “Walled Towns” is symbolical only; it does not imply the
great ramparts of masonry with machicolated towers, moats, drawbridges
and great city gates such as once guarded the beautiful cities of the
Middle Ages. It might, of course; there is no reason why a city should
not so protect itself from the world without, if its fancy led in this
pictorial direction; and after all, anyone who has been so fortunate
as to live for a time in an ancient walled town, even under modernism,
knows how potent is the psychological force of grey, guarding walls,
with the little city within, and beyond the gates not only the fields
and orchards and vineyards as they were in the old days, but also,
and kept aloof by the ancient walls, the railways and factories of
an inclement modernism. No, the adjective is symbolical merely, and
indicates the fact that around these communities there is drawn a
definite inhibition that absolutely cuts off from the town itself and
“all they that dwell therein” those things from the assault of which
refuge has been sought. I could easily imagine that these inhibitions
might vary more or less as between one Walled Town and another,
although certain general principles would be preserved everywhere,
since these would be implied in the very movement itself.

Here are certain examples of what I mean. The antithesis between
capital and labour would be impossible. Some form of a restored guild
system would be the only workable basis. Production would be normally
for use, not profit; and advertising or exploitation of any kind, or
any other form of “creating markets,” would be rigidly tabooed. Every
family would hold land sufficient for its own maintenance so far
as possible farm and garden products are concerned. Certain large,
expensive machines, by their nature not always in use, would be owned
by the community, while the transportation of surplus produce to
outside markets, the maintenance of a dairy and a canning plant,
possibly also a mill and bakery, would be communally undertaken.
As joyful living through that simplicity which follows from the
elimination of unwholesome desires is a fundamental principle, it
follows that in every case there would be a revival of the old
principle of sumptuary laws, certain things being excluded as vicious
in themselves, others as poisoning in their influence. Of course
there is great danger here, since there is the constant menace of a
pernicious infringement on that personal liberty which is an essential
of all right living. The fact is incontestable, however, that our
present intolerable social condition which seems to focus at one
point in the “high cost of living” is due to two things: first, the
multiplication during the last forty years of an incalculable number
of foolish luxuries and “amenities of life” we were far happier
without, but which now through familiarity we look on as indispensable;
second, the fact I already have referred to that more than half the
labour expended today goes to produce utterly useless, grossly ugly,
or vitiatingly luxurious commodities, while half the cost of this
ridiculous mass of superfluities goes to the tout, the drummer, the
tradesman and the advertiser. In some way the balance must be restored,
and this can be accomplished partly by regulations formally set forth,
partly by the moral force of a better type of life actually put in
process and exerting its silent influence over the people themselves.
To a great extent it would be a case of “local option” extended to
more than the question of drink. It would be neither useful nor wise
(indeed it might be actionable) for me to attempt a list of the things
we should be better off without. Each one can make his list to suit
himself, and he will be surprised, if he deals with the question
frankly, at the length of the schedule.

There is no way in which life can be brought back to a sane
and wholesome and noble basis except through the recovery of a
right religion and a right philosophy, the establishing of a new
industrial and commercial system as radically opposed to the
insanities of Bolshevism as it is to the sinister efficiency of the
capitalist-proletarian _régime_, and by the elimination of the
useless and crushing impedimenta that have been heaped upon us by
“labour-saving” machines, the craft and ingenuity of misguided
inventors, and the monumental ability of the system of advertising.
Within the deadly coil of life as it is now irrevocably fixed by the
society of today, there is no possibility of escape (barring the
threatened success of Marxian socialism as this has taken shape in
internationalism and Bolshevism), for the individual is helpless,
bound hand and foot by the forces of custom, public opinion, lethargy
and luxury, and by what Dr. Jacks so well calls “the tyranny of mere
things.” So the real men felt in the time of St. Benedict, and of St.
Odo of Cluny and St. Robert of Molesmes, of St. Norbert and St. Francis
and St. Dominic and St. Bruno. They left the world in order that they
might regain it, even though their eyes were fixed on a heavenly
country. For themselves and their followers they gained a better type
of life than the world could then offer, and their deeds lived after
them in centuries of a regenerated life.

It is our habit of mind to think of the period of decline and
catastrophe that intervenes between one era and the next as something
awful and ominous, when the whole world realizes the horror of change
and is sunk in black despair. In this we are undoubtedly as wrong as
we are in the case of our interpretation of history. St. Augustine
and St. Jerome saw the significance of the fall of the Roman Empire,
but such other documentary evidence as exists would indicate that the
Romans as a whole took it much as a matter of course, with little
sense of the vastness of the catastrophe and the plenitude of the
humiliation. In the ninth century men were so steeped in the universal
sin and corruption they ceased to retain any perspective whatever.
Very likely while Marozia and her clan were turning Rome and the
Church into a monstrous offence against decency, the general public,
as well as the world-wide corrupting influences themselves, thought
that their “civilization” was really not so bad after all. The same is
true of the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, when the beginnings
of the Renaissance dazzled man’s eyes to the tragedy of the ending
of Mediævalism and the fast growing profligacy in act and thought.
We ourselves are in similar case. We are so near the events that
are bringing modernism to an end that we can estimate them not at
all in their true nature. Read any newspaper of today, talk with any
“practical business man,” or indeed almost any clergyman, educator or
professed “philosopher,” and you will find the attitude of mind that
looks on the war and the current beginnings of social revolution as
untoward episodes, the insane creations of froward men, that only need
time and patience for the crushing, to permit the world to go on again
just as before, only faster and more gloriously, towards the iridescent
apotheosis of democratic politics, imperial business, scientific
acquisition, and the reign of reason. The incubus of the thing-that-is
cannot be shifted and, as so many times before, it is only ruthless
catastrophe that can bring it to an end.

Similarly we do not realize how new a thing is this tyranny of the
material product, this obsession of the machine and the things it
produces, the ideas and habits and superstitions it generates. I am
not so old a man, as lives run, but I can still remember the old
patriarchal life of the New England countryside before the juggernaut
that crushed wholesome society and sane living had begun its fatal
course. In the year 1880, when I first knew a great city, there were
only three forces then in operation which differentiated its growth
that had not existed in the time of Cæsar--steam as power, the electric
telegraph and the elevator, the last a novelty of less than ten years’
existence. The great forces that were to transform society had been in
existence for varying periods: some from the Renaissance, some from the
Reformation, some from the Civil Wars in England, some from the French
Revolution, some from the mechanical discoveries between 1767 and 1830,
some from our own Civil War. It is not until the latter date, however,
that they became fully operative; and the incubus we would now remove,
if we could, and if we fully realized its nature, is actually the
creation of the last fifty years.

I have said above that I clearly remember the old _régime_ as it stood
at the opening of this fifty-year period of monstrous aggregation,
exaggeration and acceleration, and this memory, together with some
thirty years of study of Mediæval civilization, has much to do with
the conviction that man cannot be free or sane or reasonably happy
until he forcibly tears himself (or forcibly is torn) from the deadly
evil of modernism in which he is enmeshed. The positive memory may help
to show something of that to which I conceive we must return.

In the year 1870 my grandfather’s place was to all intents and purposes
what it had been since the first portion of the old house was built
during the reign of William and Mary. He was “The Squire” in his
family and over the community, as his fathers had been before him for
two centuries. If wills were to be drawn, land surveyed, property
transferred, family quarrels adjusted, the duty fell upon him. From
a material point of view the house and the farm and the way of life
were as they had been. There was, I think, a mechanical corn-sheller,
but I remember no other new-fangled mechanical device. The wheat for
flour was grown on the place and ground at a near-by mill. Until but
a few years before, the wool and flax for clothing and linen were
also of home production, while the great loom was still in its place
in the dim attic with its odour of thyme and beeswax. In addition
to all the necessary fruits and vegetables, all the butter, cheese,
bacon, hams came from the estate. So of course did the honey and the
metheglyn, or honey-wine as you read of it in Chaucer, which, I verily
believe, was made there last of all places in the world. To a great
extent the life was still communal. For mowing, planting, harvesting,
shearing, husking, the farmers came together to work in common, while
the disability of one brought the others together to do his work.
Communal also in a sense was the household. Many a time have I awakened
as a boy, between lavender-scented homespun sheets, and beneath a
wonderful woven coverlet, to dress in the early dawn and go down to the
long kitchen with its eight-foot fireplace, to find all the feminine
portion of the household preparing such a breakfast as the present
day cannot afford; and later I have watched the neighbors gathered in
the “east room” ingeniously “drawing in” rugs and mats of marvellous
(if not strictly artistic) design and colour. As was the custom in
that country, the house was double, the eldest son occupying the new
wing until in time he removed to the old part and his son in turn
took the new. It was a place of tradition, of immemorial custom, of
self-respecting because arduous life, and every inch of ancient house,
of vast and rambling barns, even of the fields and pastures, gardens
and orchards and woodland, was redolent of old history, of permanence,
of stability, of dignity and of a vivid liberty.

Here was no telephone, no automobile, no elaborate collection of
complicated and costly machines, no flood of cheap newspapers,
magazines or other “literature,” no weekly expedition to the “movies,”
no ready-made clothes that must be constantly replaced or that annually
went out of fashion, no pianola or graphophone, no “art-furniture,” no
candy and cheap drinks and fruit out-of-season. Neither was there any
labour problem, or strikes or poverty or high-cost-of-living.

“A hard life”? Yes, in a way, but its hardness was more than balanced
by what it gave: self-respect, liberty, freedom from the tyranny and
oppression of outside forces; above all, _character_, and of a strength
and simplicity and fineness it would be hard to match today. I do not
doubt that country and village life as it was then in the North, and
had been in the South until ten years before (not as it had become in
another twenty years when the new forces had begun to seep in), was
more productive of real happiness and of sterling character than has
been any form of life that has developed since.

Of course there was the other side to the case. Life then, good as
it was, lacked some of the qualities that existed in the Middle
Ages, the loss of which was a serious handicap. There was a hard and
unlovely religion, the arts had wholly disappeared, and the exquisite
environment man had always made for himself had vanished from life. The
stimulus and the vital communal sense of the old guilds, the games,
the merrymaking, the living religious practices, had faded into a
colder and more austere neighbourliness. The comradeship of pilgrimage
and common adventure and “church ales” had vanished utterly, and in
every way life was becoming more drab and colourless. Much remained,
however, though in a vanishing estate, of the clean and simple and
wholesome life of a dead past, and in comparison with the common life
of today, on the farm, in the factory, in village or great city, it
must commend itself in such degree that many sacrifices are worth while
if we can win it back. Win it back, but not as it stood then. Out of
a farther past must come many things to enrich its content and make
more beautiful its condition. Out of the present must come much also.
An archæological or artificial restoration would be as undesirable as
it is impossible. What modernism has given--or sold--that is in itself
good, must be retained, and this is much. The trouble is the good is
so intricately mixed with the bad that the untangling seems almost
hopeless. Since our standard of comparative values is so distorted we
have no sound basis from which we can set to work. Only through the
process of what is really a new spiritual enlightenment, manifesting
itself through both religion and philosophy, can the task be
accomplished, for no ingenious engine, no clever device, no political
panacea will prove even of temporary value. Probably the control of
this spiritual stimulus is out of our hands; it usually is, being
granted to men at times, at other times withheld. While we await the
issue we can at least try humbly, and perhaps doubtfully, if we cannot
take the first steps towards earning the indispensable boon, and it may
be the first step will be into Walled Towns.




IV


Beaulieu is a Walled Town and it lies about forty miles from one of the
largest cities of New England. The forty-mile road is in all things
about what such a road is today; the same industrial suburbs, with
the further fringe of slate-grey tenements in their dreary and dirty
yards, then the subsidiary towns of dull or flamboyant cottages, barren
railway stations, third-rate shops, harsh factories, each separated
from the next by marshes or barrens where refuse is dumped, and
speculative roads and house-lots cry their unsavoury wares. Little by
little decent residences crop up and so the ring of reasonable opulence
is reached,--now as then good so far as nature is let alone, bad where
the architect and landscapist and gardener exercise their ingenuity.
Farms follow, and pasture and woodland, unkempt but inoffensive,
sometimes even beautiful when the hand of man has been withheld.
Three or four ambitious and growing towns break the good country,
each contributing of its own in the shape of mills, slums, wastes,
commercial architecture, gaudy signs, hurry, noise, dust and bad
smells. After the last there is an interval of comparative quiet and
decency while the road runs through a respectable forest, rising as it
enters among low hills, with a glimpse of water here and there, a small
lake, a brook, and at last a fairly wide view.

On the bridge the view changes. There is something different in the
lands beyond, though the difference is at first intangible. It is
farming land for some two or three miles in front and reaching in a
wide sweep right and left, while beyond the land rises swiftly with a
rather thick growth of large trees above which lift two or three grey
stone towers, and a silvery spire, very delicate and lofty; a view that
might be in any English county or in France or the Rhineland. The farms
are evidently under high cultivation, divided into rather small fields
by hedgerows marked by an unusual number of well-kept trees. There
are few farmhouses but many large barns of stone somewhat suggesting
those of western Pennsylvania. Such houses as there are, are also
of stone in great part, with brick here and there and considerable
white plaster. The well-built road is, as before, crowded with motor
vehicles, but two things have wholly ceased at the river--advertising
signs and smoking factory chimney; as far as the eye can see neither is
visible.

The zone of farms is quickly passed and then comes a space of orchards
and vineyards; the highway divides, one branch to the right, another
to the left, and at the fork stands a stone shrine with the figure of
St. Christopher; practically all the motors go to the right, but we
take the road to the left, which curves sharply after a few hundred
yards, crosses a stone bridge of a single arch over a narrow but swift
river, and is intercepted by a long, irregular mass of stone buildings
with many mullioned windows, and a lofty tower something like that of
St. John’s College in Cambridge, with a broad, high, pointed arch, and
a chain reaching from side to side, blocking the way to all wheeled
traffic. This is the Bar Gate of the Walled Town of Beaulieu, and here
all automobiles must stop, for they are not permitted within the town.
There is a good garage on one side; a sort of inn and a livery stable
on the other, where one may hire a carriage or saddle horses, which
alone are allowed inside the gates.

The rambling grey-stone building, which in parts rises sheer from the
river’s edge and is not unlike Warwick Castle, serves many purposes.
The octroi is strict and all goods brought into the town for sale
must pay a varying _ad valorem_ tax, while the “liberty of the town”
is granted to outsiders only on payment of a small fee. No one can
sell in the town without a license, while some things are wholly
prohibited, such, for example, as those things that would compete with
native products, whether of food-stuffs, manufacture or artisanship,
and those articles which the town has prohibited as deleterious or as
“useless luxuries.” A bailiff and council of three sit here in a fine
stone-vaulted room opening off the great gate, for three hours each
morning, to issue their licenses or prohibitions. Here also are the
town telephones and telegraphs, for while these as well as motor cars
are recognized as necessities on emergency occasions, they are held to
be “useless luxuries” as private possessions and are forbidden within
the walls. There is nothing to prevent a townsman owning and using
a motor car or private telephone beyond the town walls, if he likes,
though this is looked on with disfavour, and as a matter of fact is
unusual. In the early days of this, as of all Walled Towns, and to some
extent thereafter, those who became townsmen continued their business
or professions “in the world outside the walls,” that is to say in
some neighboring city, and the jurisdiction of the Walled Town did not
extend beyond its own precincts and lands. Usually in a few years’
time these men adapted themselves to the town life and law, giving up
their outside interests and becoming “Burgesses of the Free City” with
their interests and material activities concentrated within its limits.
Conduct of government is wholly within the hands of these burgesses.
As for the town telephones and motor cars, their use is free to all
townsmen in cases of illness or other recognized emergency.

Over the gate-tower floats the big banner of the town, above the arch
is its coat of arms emblazoned in colour and gold, and within the
gate are always two halberdiers on guard. This is not affectation
or a wilful mediævalism, but because all the Walled Towns know the
value of symbolism and use it universally and intelligently. All civic
ceremonials, indeed all the common acts of the town officials, are
carried out with much show and dignity and magnificence. There are
fine robes of office, precise etiquette, elaborate functions; nothing
is done casually or haphazard, but with dignity, beauty and a real
pride in the nobility of the communal life. Long before the founding
of the first Walled Town it was generally known that the depravity,
or at least the incompetence, that had become chronic in civic life,
was partially due to the false “democracy” which had shorn it of every
vestige of dignity, of ceremonial, of difference from the common
affairs of business life, and the potency of symbolism was one of the
original elements in the great revolution which brought the Walled
Towns into existence.

Passing now under the great echoing vault of the Bar Gate, we come at
once into the town itself. There is first of all a small square or
market-place with rather thickly set, stone-built and gabled house,
with glimpses between, and through occasional archways, into gardens
behind. On one side is the Exchange, a considerable building with an
open arcade along its front; it is here that the surplus products
of the town are sold--grain and farm produce, cloth, or whatever it
may be that is paid through the tax in kind or placed in the hands
of the Exchange officials for sale outside the community. The main
street leads from the square and curves up a slight grade. Here the
houses are well separated, with garden walls between, sometimes
pierced by grated openings that give more glimpses of gardens around
and behind. As in the old days, these houses are mostly workshops
and salesrooms as well as residences, for this is the street of
craftsmen of all sorts--workers in metals, wood, leather; potters,
embroiderers, tailors; carvers in stone, painters, makers of musical
instruments. Every craft and art that is needed by the townspeople
is found here, for one of the foundation stones of the Walled Towns
is self-sufficiency; that is to say, everything ordinarily needful
is produced by the town for the town, the necessities that cannot be
furnished because of physical and climatic difficulties being reduced
to the smallest number. Coffee and tea, a few spices, tropical fruits,
rice, tobacco, cotton, silk and certain wines are beyond the contriving
of a Walled Town in the north temperate zone and must be imported; but
this is done by town officials, who are paid salaries, and the goods
are resold at a standard advance on the wholesale cost. Everything
that is possible is produced within the town itself, and either by
individual craftsmen or, where bulk products are necessary, in the
workshops maintained by the community under the charge of a special and
salaried group of officials.

The specialization and localizing of industries and the division of
labour were two of the causes of industrial civilization--and still
are in “the world without.” That one town or district should be given
over to the weaving of cotton or the spinning of wool; that shoes
should chiefly be produced in Lynn, furniture in Grand Rapids, glass in
Pittsburgh, beer in Milwaukee, hams in Chicago; that from all over a
vast district the raw material of manufacture should be transported for
hundreds, perhaps thousands of miles, to various howling wildernesses
of highly specialized factories, only to be shipped back again after
fabrication to be used or consumed by many of the original producers,
was and is one of the preposterous absurdities of an industrial system
supported on some of the most appalling sophistry that ever issued out
of the Adullamite caves of political economy.

In the Walled Towns all this is changed. In the first place no man is a
free burgess unless he is a land-holder, and the minimum is garden land
sufficient to supply all the needs of his family that can be satisfied
from this source; the maximum is that amount of farm land that he
can maintain at a minimum standard of productivity. So far as I know
every family also keeps as many cows and poultry as will furnish the
normal requirements in the shape of dairy products, eggs, and fowl for
eating. The farms, which lie outside the walls and quite surround the
town, do more than this, and much produce finds its way to the communal
dairy, which is used for the production of butter and cheese for the
townspeople, and also for sale outside the walls. As each town has its
own special products, maintained always at the highest standard, the
market never fails.

In the matter of cloth and clothing, wool and flax are grown both by
individuals and by the community, and the spinning and weaving are
done in the town mills. These are built and equipped at the common
charge and managed by officials who serve for fixed salaries. A certain
percentage on the value of all raw material brought in for working
up into the finished product is assessed on the owner, and this may
be paid in cash or in kind. No raw material is ever acquired from
outside the community; all internal surplus is purchased and made up
into cloth, which is sold first to any townspeople who wish to buy, or
second to outside purchasers, the profits going to defray the running
expenses. As a matter of fact, there is always a large surplus of wool
and flax over and above the normal needs of each producer, and the
mills not only run at a profit but pay well on the original investment.
In these mills highly perfected machinery is used, for while the Walled
Towns were formed partly for the elimination, so far as possible, of
machines in the affairs of life, it is realized that they may be used
as actual labour-savers, and without serious injury to the workman,
where they are employed on bulk-production such as cloth, and where
the element of competition is eliminated. Since in manufacture of this
kind division of labour is unavoidable and the work is mechanical
and akin to drudgery, the wages paid are high, while the hours of
employment never exceed thirty a week. Practically all the employees
are able to take care of their own gardens and many have small farms as
well. During the seed-time and harvest periods the mills are shut down.
When it happens (as it often does) that a mill shows a profit, all in
excess of three per cent on the value of the plant is divided between
the employees and the clerical force, for one of the established laws
of all Walled Towns is that capital is entitled only to a fixed return,
the surplus belonging to the labour, both mental and physical, that
produces the results. Stock companies as such are strictly prohibited
and it is unlawful to pay money for the use of money furnished by
inactive investors. The mills are of course not large; they are
pleasantly situated, not without architectural quality, and they are
always run either by water-power or by electricity hydraulically
generated. Steam is not used in any case.

The restoration of real crafts has resulted in reducing the use of
machinery to the lowest terms. Handicraft has been restored, in wood,
metals, all fancy weaving, glass making, pottery, leather-work, and
to a certain extent in printing, not only because the results are in
every way finer and more durable, but because labour so employed is
intelligent, mentally stimulating and physically satisfying, while
by so much the production of coal, the mining, smelting and forging
of iron ore, and the fabricating of articles of iron and steel are
reduced. The Walled Towns hold that such labour is mentally stultifying
if not actually degrading, and it is with them a point of morals that
they should make it necessary to the smallest degree possible.

The main street leads into the central square of the town, a spacious
open place of great dignity and beauty, surrounded by admirable
buildings of public character, where the simplicity of the houses
and shops gives place to considerable richness both in design and in
colour. On one side is the parish church, in this particular case
not unlike St. Cuthbert’s, Wells, only half hidden by fine trees and
surrounded by a green and shady churchyard. On another side is the
Town Hall, also with a lofty tower flying the great flag of the city,
while the other sides of the square are filled with the rich façades
of the Guild Halls. Opening out of this central square is the Market
Place, entered through a noble archway between two of the Guild Halls,
and in this square is the Market House and several more Guild Halls.
Opposite, a street connects after some few hundred feet with a third
open place, in this case a pleasure garden, and here are the theatre,
the concert hall, the public baths, the principal inn and several cafés
and shops, the latter being more especially devoted to those things
which are associated with the lighter side of life.

Beyond the immediate vicinity of these squares come the
dwelling-places, each a separate house with a garden never less than an
acre in extent. No multiple houses of any sort are permitted and each
family must maintain a separate house and garden. The roads here wind
pleasantly and are well shaded by trees; niched statues, both secular
and religious, and shrines, are quite common. Here also are the several
conventual establishments belonging to various orders, and varying
much as between one town and another, but there is always a house for
men and one for women. In the particular town we are considering, the
chief monastic institution is Benedictine, and it stands on higher land
than the rest of the town and is a true abbey both in size and in its
official status. There is also a house of Dominican Sisters and one of
Canons Regular of St. Augustine. Where the land begins to drop down
again towards the river as it curves around on the side of the town
opposite that at which we entered, is the college, with very spacious
grounds, groves and gardens, the whole commanding a wide view out
across the zone of farms and so to the low hills on the horizon to the
west.

Let us now retrace our steps to the group of squares and see something
of the significance of the various buildings and the part they play in
the life of the Walled Town. We will interrogate some citizen in each
case who can best explain that portion of the polity with which he is
associated. The first shall be the parish priest, and he shall talk
to us as we sit in the lych-gate with the silvery grey church behind,
and in front the square where people are constantly passing back and
forth,--not the dull, drab throng of men in ugly “sack-suits” and
“derby” hats of the cities of the outer world, and women in fantastic
finery or sordid, sad-coloured gowns, but a self-respecting people with
some sense of beauty and a manifest delight in colour.

“There is,” says the parson, “as you will see, only one parish church,
though as the town has grown other chapels have been added in other
quarters, each of which is under a vicar who is one of the general body
of parish clergy. The whole town forms one parish and the whole body
of parochial clergy sit together to deal with the spiritual affairs
of the town, while all the free burgesses meet in common to deal with
the temporal interests of the parish. No, there are no denominational
divisions. Each town as it is founded is made up only of those of the
same religious convictions, and thereafter none is added who is not
of the same belief. Denominationalism is inconsistent with unity of
action, coöperation and true democracy, and however much the laws and
customs of the Walled Towns may vary (and there is no little diversity)
in this there is complete unanimity. No one is of course constrained
to go to church or accept the ministrations of the clergy, although
refusal is practically unheard of. There have been cases of those who
have lost their faith, but sooner or later this means their withdrawal
from the town itself. The parish church is actually the centre of
spiritual life of the community. Its services are very numerous,
particularly on Sundays and holy days, and it is, as you have seen,
a sort of synthesis of all the arts raised to the highest attainable
level. Each guild has either its own chapel or altar, and once a year
it holds a great service at which its members are bound to be present.”

“The relationship between the Church and civic life is, I suppose,
about what it was before the Reformation. Religion enters into all
the affairs of life as it did then, and the visible manifestations
are pretty much the same. You will have noticed the many shrines and
statues in all parts of the town, and you can also see within a few
days’ time one of the many festival processions through the streets. In
the Walled Towns religion is not a hidden thing, nor is it segregated
in a few places and confined to one day in the week. In the world
outside the walls, where the old sectarian divisions still continue,
this realization of religion would be impossible; but within the walls,
because of the unanimity of conviction on the part of those that are
drawn to any particular town, it is not only possible but inevitable.”

We cross the square and enter the Town Hall with its shady arcades
and its painted and gilded statues like those on the Hôtel de Ville
of Bourges. We go up a broad stone stairway and enter the anteroom
of the Provost, who is the head of the government. The room has fine
tapestries on the walls, with much well-carved furniture, and the
guards and ushers suggest neither by their costumes nor their manners
the familiar police officers on duty in the ordinary city hall. The
building and the officials and the grave and rather stately ceremonial
all convey the impression that a Walled Town is both a City State and
a Free State, and that its formal and personal expression is a matter
of dignity, reverence and self-respect. Once, not long ago, being in
a large city of the North-West, I was invited to address the Mayor
and Aldermen on certain matters pertaining to that department of my
own city government of which I happened to be the head. The corridors
were crowded with dirty or sinister loafers interspersed with burly
policemen. There were spitoons everywhere which served only a part of
their purpose. The Mayor’s reception room was not unhandsome, but it
was full of knots of whispering and sly-eyed political hangers-on,
reporters, and more loafers, while the air was rank with tobacco-smoke.
Presently the Mayor and Aldermen strolled in, hailing various
individuals by nicknames and slang phrases, and disposed themselves
at ease around a long table; some were in their shirt-sleeves, for it
was a hot midsummer day. I was listened to politely enough, and the
questions asked were not unintelligent; it was the attitude, the form,
that was at fault. The whole thing was more like a social meeting of
commercial travellers in the office of a country hotel than a session
of the governing body of a great city.

After this digression let us return to our Walled Town. From the
anteroom we are conducted to the state reception room, and here we are
received by the Provost in his long, furred gown and his gold chain
of office. He is an old man, grey-bearded, and his courtly manners
indicate at once his breeding, his self-respect and his sense of the
dignity and significance of his position. From him we learn that only
land-holders are burgesses of the town and that no others possess a
vote or may hold office; the distinction is less invidious than it
might appear, for land-holding is so fundamental a principle in the
Walled Towns that there are almost none who cannot qualify. Government
is in the hands of the Provost and Council, with a small group of
department heads who with the Provost form the executive. Any hundred
burgesses may unite for the purpose of choosing one of their number to
the Council, and as this particular town contains about three thousand
burgesses the Council consists of thirty men who are chosen annually,
while the Provost, who is elected by the Council, holds office for
ten years. There would appear to be very little legislation; each
year the Provost presents, with the financial budget, a programme of
legislation, and until this is disposed of, private legislative bills
may not be considered. A further guard against the universal curse of
democracy, reckless and ill-digested legislation initiated by single
individuals, is the provision that any private bill must be indorsed by
one fifth of all the Councillors before it can be introduced.

Taxation is almost wholly in the form of rent of land, and here the
scale is fixed from the moment the land is taken over, while it
varies as between arable land, forest, orchard, pasture, garden and
“tenement,” _i. e._ land on which is a dwelling. If through his own
industry a land-holder improves any portion of his holding, he receives
a rebate on his taxes; if he allows any land to degenerate, his tax
is increased. The tax revenue is supplemented by various fees, small
in amount and not numerous, and by the “gate tax” imposed on those
from outside who are admitted to buy or sell within the walls. Public
indebtedness is prohibited by law, the revenue must always meet the
annual expenditure, and no bonds secured by public credit may be issued.

The Walled Towns have definitely abandoned the nineteenth century
theory that the vote is a “natural right.” As said before, this
privilege is exercised only by land-holders (the great majority of
citizens) but it may be withdrawn for long or short periods and for
reasons specified in the charter. Any man found guilty of a crime or
misdemeanour forfeits the franchise, and for periods varying from one
year to life, dependent on the gravity of the offence. The burgesses
vote only through their “hundreds” and solely for the choosing of
Councillors, but the election of a Provost must be confirmed by a
mass-meeting of all burgesses, and any change in the charter must be
submitted for the same approval.

The Law Courts of a Walled Town offer many points of difference to
those of “the world without.” In the first place, it is a fundamental
principle that the object of a Court of Law is the administering of
justice, the defence of right, and the punishment of wrong. An appeal
to technicalities is therefore prohibited, and any advocate who makes
such an appeal is promptly disbarred. Normally all cases are tried and
determined by a bench of judges, though in certain cases the plaintiff
or defendant may demand a jury trial. Of course all Judges are
appointed by the Provost for life. In addition to the regular municipal
courts there is a Court of Conciliation. Under the oath of each citizen
to obey and support the charter, every case must be taken to the Court
of Conciliation before recourse is had to the regular courts of law,
the result being that very few cases fail of adjustment without formal
legal process. The Law Courts themselves are housed in a building of
a degree of beauty unusual even in a Walled Town where ugliness is
unknown, while the form and ceremony reach the final height of grave
majesty.

Let us now visit one of the guild halls, for it is in the guild that
we may find the root of the entire economic system which so sharply
differentiates society within the walls from that without. We may
take any one of the half-dozen or more, for all are practically the
same except in the design of their buildings and the decoration, the
liveries of the members and officials, and the guild banner.

All society is organized under the guild system, and every man must
be a registered member of one guild or another. The guild of the
farmers is the largest, and usually it is to this that those citizens
belong who are officials or professional men. Then there are guilds of
metal-workers of all kinds, cloth-makers, builders, artists, etc. When
a Walled Town is founded with small numbers the list of guilds is very
small, but as the town increases so do the guilds, and the different
industries organize their own groups. A guild is an artificial family
made up of all those of a common interest. Its objects are: human
fellowship, coöperation, mutual aid in illness or misfortune, the
maintaining of the highest standard in the product of all its members,
prevention of inordinate profits, regulation of the relationship
between masters, journeymen and apprentices, the standardizing of wages
and profits, craft training and education, the maintenance of and
common participation in religious services, and finally the purchase
of raw materials and the ownership and maintenance of large and costly
machinery in the few cases where that is employed.

In the Walled Town the division between capital and labour does not
and can not exist. Since production is for use, not profit, since
competition is impossible under the guild system, and since no
advertising is permitted beyond a sign-board (and they are sometimes
most notable works of art, these painted and gilded and carven signs),
exploitation, whether of labour or markets, is unknown. One of the
fundamental points in the town charters is the definite prohibition
of the “unearned increment.” Money may not be taken or paid for the
use of money, except within each guild, and here only under what are
practically emergency conditions, the rate of interest never exceeding
three per cent. Every guild has its own fund, made up from dues,
bequests, and a percentage of profits on the sale by the guild of such
surplus products as may be handed over to its officers for disposal;
but this fund cannot be invested at interest outside the walls nor is
any portion available for other than guild members, except that the
town may use it for current expenses in anticipation of the regular
land-taxes (or rent), paying three per cent therefor, and returning it
within the space of a year. The system is practically a restoration of
the guild system of the Middle Ages, and any one may find for himself
further details by referring to the many books on the subject; _e. g._
those of William Morris, Arthur Penty and Prince Kropotkin. It is the
precise antithesis of collectivism, socialism and trades-unionism of
whatever form.

Within the Walled Towns the educational system shows few points of
resemblance to the standards and methods still pursued outside. It is
universally recognized that the prime object of all education is the
development of inherent character, and for this reason it is never
divorced from religion; the idea of a rigidly secularized education is
abhorrent, and the dwellers in the Walled Towns rightly attribute to
its prevalence in the nineteenth century much of the retrogression in
character, the loss of sound standards of value, and the disappearance
of leadership which synchronized with the twentieth century break-down
of civilization even if it were not indeed its primary cause. Neither
is there any false estimate of the possibilities of education; it is
held that while it can measurably develop qualities latent in the
child by reason of its racial impulse, it cannot put in what is not
there already. The old superstition that education and environment
were omnipotent, and that they were the safeguards as well as the
justification of democracy, since given an identical environment
and equal educational opportunities an hundred children of as many
classes, races and antecedents would turn out equal as potential
members of a free society, has long since been abandoned. It is
impossible to enter into this question at length, but the chief points
are these.

Education is not compulsory, but parents are bound to see that their
children can “read, write and cipher.” Primary schools are maintained
by the town and are conducted largely along the lines first developed
by Dr. Thomas Edward Shields in the early twentieth century. Beyond
primary grades the schools are maintained by various units such as the
guilds, the parish and the monasteries and convents. While considerable
variation exists as between one school and another, they are all under
the supervision of the Director of Education in order that certain
standards may be maintained. Variety both in subjects taught and in
methods followed is held to be most desirable, and complete freedom of
choice exists between the schools, though a parent wishing to send a
child to some school other than those maintained by his own guild pays
an annual fee for the privilege. Beyond reading, writing, arithmetic
and music, which are common to all, the curriculum varies widely,
though history, literature and Latin are practically universal. In some
schools mathematics will be carried further than in others, in some
natural science, while elsewhere literature, history, modern languages
will be emphasized. There is no effort to subject all children to the
same methods and to force them to follow the same courses,--quite the
reverse; neither is the object the carrying of all children through the
same schools to the same point. It is held that beyond a certain stage
most children profit little or nothing by continued intensive study.
On the other hand, there are always those whose desires and capacities
would carry them to the limit. These are watched for with the most
jealous care, and if a boy or girl shows special aptitude along any
particular line he becomes an honour student, and thereafter he is
in a sense a ward of the community, being sent without charge to the
higher schools, the college, and even on occasion to some university
beyond the limits of the Walled Town if he can gain there something not
available within the walls. Of course any student may continue as far
as he likes, or is able, but this is not encouraged except in the case
of the honour student, and he must himself meet his own expenses. The
authorities are particularly careful to discover any special ability in
any of the arts, literature and philosophy, and it is the boast of the
Walled Towns that no one who gives promise along any one of these lines
need fail of achievement through lack of opportunity. In the case of
the various crafts also the same care is exercised, and a boy showing
particular aptitude is at once given the opportunity of entrance into
the proper guild as an apprentice, after he has been prepared for this
by a modified course of instruction adapted to his particular ability.

The college has something the effect of a blending of New College,
Oxford, and St. John’s, Cambridge. It is perhaps the most beautiful
element in the Walled Town, and here every intellectual, spiritual and
artistic quality is fostered to the fullest degree. The college is a
corporation under control of the alumni and the faculty, not in the
hands of trustees, as was the unfortunate fashion amongst American
universities in the nineteenth century. There are many fellowships
granted for notable achievements along many lines, and a Fellow may
claim free food and lodgings for life, if he choose, the return being
certain service of a limited nature in the line of instruction, either
as lecturer or preceptor. A few students are received from without
the walls, but the number may not exceed five per cent of the student
body, and high fees are charged for the privilege. There are no regular
courses divided into four years. An honour student must take his
Bachelor’s Degree within six years, his Master’s Degree in not less
than two years thereafter, and his Doctorate in another four years,
otherwise his privilege lapses and he must pay as other students,
in which case there are no limits whatever and a man may spend a
lifetime in study if he desires--and can pay the price. All the regular
members of the Faculty must be burgesses, but many lecture courses are
given by visiting professors from all parts of the world. Latin is a
prerequisite for the Bachelor’s and Master’s Degrees, and Greek for a
Doctorate, whatever the line that may be followed.

As has been said above, the recreation quarter of the town is around a
square or garden a short distance from the central square. Here are
to be found the public baths and gymnasium, together with a number of
gay and attractive cafés and restaurants, the theatres, concert halls,
etc. To a very great extent all the music and drama are the product of
the people themselves. As has been said, music is almost the foundation
of the educational system, therefore trained as they are from earliest
childhood, good music, vocal, instrumental, orchestral, even operatic,
is a natural and even inevitable result. The same is true of the drama,
and nightly plays, operas, concerts are given by the townspeople
themselves which reach a standard comparable with that of professionals
elsewhere. Now and then, as a mark of special commendation, actors,
singers and musicians are invited by the Provost and Council to visit
the town, but as a general thing all is done by the people themselves.
The moving picture show is prohibited.

With all the rich pageantry of life in a Walled Town, the magnificent
church services, where all the arts assemble in the greatest æsthetic
synthesis man has ever devised, the religious and secular festivals
with their processions and merrymaking and dancing, the form and
ceremony of ecclesiastical and civic life, and the unbroken environment
of beauty, the craving for “shows” which holds without the walls and
must be satisfied by tawdry and sensational dramatic performances,
professional entertainers and the “movies,” is largely absent here
where all life is couched in terms of true drama and living beauty.
Here is no hard line of demarcation between a drab and sordid and
hustling daily life on the one hand, and “amusement” on the other.
All the arts are in constant use, and music and drama are merely
extensions of this common use into slightly different fields. The
same holds good of the other arts. An “art museum” is unknown, for it
is a contradiction in terms. The Walled Town is full of pictures and
sculpture and all the products of the art-crafts; but the latter are
in every household, while the pictures and sculptures are in all the
churches and public buildings, where they belong, and are constantly
and universally visible. If an old picture is obtained, or a Mediæval
statue or a tapestry, it is at once placed in a position similar to
that for which it was originally intended. It would be perfectly
impossible for the authorities to put a Bellini altar-piece in a
yawning museum, jostled by crowded others and visible on week-days on
payment of an admission fee, “Saturday afternoon and Sunday free.”
Instead it is placed over an altar in the parish church or in some
chapel. There are museums of sorts, but they are connected with the
guild halls and contain only models for instruction and emulation.

And what of the social organism as it has developed under these
definite modes of action? In the first place there are certain explicit
inhibitions, as has already been indicated, the elimination of many
details of luxury and artificial desires which tend to turn much human
energy to futile ends, to raise the cost of living to abnormal heights,
to establish false levels between those that have and those that have
not, and that defeat every sane effort towards a simplification of life
and its maintenance in accordance with right standards of comparative
value. Desires have not been reduced in force, but they have been
vastly cut down in number and turned towards real values. Owing to
the ban on usury and the unearned increment, and the restoration of
production for use in place of production for profit, wide variations
in wealth no longer exist, although there are still differences due
to thrift, more intelligent or prolonged work, and above all to
superiority in the thing produced. Variations in social status still
exist; indeed they are fostered, as a matter of fact, but they are
no longer based either on money or on power. A Walled Town is at the
same time individualist, coöperative and aristocratic, so far more
closely resembling Mediæval society than any other that has existed,
and therefore sharply differentiated both from society as it had become
in the nineteenth century, and as it was aimed at by the socialists,
the anarchists and the democrats of the same period. As all society
is organized in guilds, and as in each there are the three classes of
apprentices, journeymen and masters, so while each class has its own
recognized status, there is an equally recognized difference between
them. An apprentice may not hold land, therefore he cannot be a burgess
of the free city, while a journeyman or master may not become a burgess
unless he does hold land, and only burgesses participate in the civic
duties and privileges of the town. There are certain offices which only
a master may hold, and there are others which are open only to those
masters who have become members of one of the Academies, or who belong
to the Order of Knighthood. The Provost, for example, may be chosen
only from amongst the knights. These highest ranks of dignity are
constituted as follows:

In each Walled Town there are several Academies, each made up of
those masters in the several guilds who have achieved the highest
eminence. There is one Academy of Science and Craft, an Academy of
Arts and Letters, an Academy of Philosophy, etc. Entrance into this
circle of supreme achievement is effected either by direct choice of
the members of the Academy, in which case the guild from which the
candidate is chosen must ratify the choice, or by nomination on the
part of the guild, when the recommendation so made must be sanctioned
by the members of the Academy. Only high proficiency in some specified
direction is ground for election to these Academies, and membership
is an honour of the greatest distinction. The Order of Knighthood,
however, is conferred rather for high qualities of character and for
public service; any man, apprentice, minor official, servant, may
be made a Knight if he demonstrates some high quality of honour or
service. Here the power to nominate lies in the hands both of the
Provost and of the knights themselves, but the latter have the right
to confirm or reject the nominee of the Provost, while he has the same
power if the nomination comes from the knights. Both the Academies and
the knights have the right to degrade and expel a member of their own
order; but when this is done it must be as the result of an open trial,
if the accused so demands. Conviction of certain crimes and offences
works degradation automatically.

The object of these higher circles of specially chosen individuals
is the official recognition of character and achievement and the
constituting of certain groups of distinguished men whose duty it is to
guard the highest ideals, not only of their own crafts, but of society
itself through the free city which embodies their communal life. The
Walled Towns know well that, while all men are equal in the sight of
God and before the Law, there is otherwise no such thing as equality,
that it would be fatal were it ever achieved, and that the efforts at
its accomplishment have undermined such society as we once had until it
has crumbled and crashed into the unhandsome _débris_ of its own ruin.
The determination of inequalities by false standards of comparative
value is almost as ill-favoured a thing as a doctrinaire equality;
between the cash values of the bourgeois nineteenth century and the
crazy overturnings and levellings and topsy-turvydom of twentieth
century “democracy,” or Bolshevism, there is little to choose. High
values, few, cherished, recognized and honoured, are one great end
of society, of life itself, and it is in these crowning marks of
distinction and achievement that humanity finds its best expression
as well as its safe guides and sure leaders. In the Walled Towns is
always the ardent quest for something to honour, whether it is some
concrete product of art, science, letters, craftsmanship, or whether it
is a citizen, an ideal, a memory of the past, a figure in history, a
saint--or God Himself. Honour, service, loyalty, worship,--these things
have wholly taken the place of an insolent assurance of equality, a
bawling about rights, a denial of superiority, a proclaiming of the
omnipotence of men “by virtue of their manhood alone.”




V


It will be evident at once that the Walled Towns are founded in
deliberate opposition to nineteenth century democracy as well as to its
bastard issue, its Mordred and its Nemesis, anarchy and Bolshevism,
and to its inevitable but blood-kin enemy, socialism. Through state
socialism, communism or internationalism a fool-hardy and illiterate
democracy, surrendering at discretion to the materialism of industrial
civilization, has striven to maintain the thing itself in all its
integrity and its wealth-producing potency while turning its products
into the hands of the many rather than the few. Even now, with the
myrrh of war still bitter on the lips, the dim visions of greater
things are fading away, and only one cry goes up for ever greater
production, for more intensive effort, in order that the material
losses may be retrieved.

Neither by state-socialism nor by soviets nor by any other ingenious
device can wholesome social conditions be brought out of a thing
unwholesome in itself; neither can a new control, a new basis of
production and distribution, or new laws, compacts and covenants,
take the place of a new spiritual energy, a new vision of ultimate
values and their relationships. That communism, collectivism and
social democracy have all gone bankrupt during and following the war
is one truth at least we have learned. The methods were foolish enough
but the object aimed at, the preservation and redemption of modern
industrialism, was worse.

The impulse and incentive towards Walled Towns, whenever it comes, will
be primarily social, the revolt of man against the imperial scale,
against a life of false values impregnably intrenched behind custom,
superstition and self-interest, against the quantitative standard,
the tyranny of bulk, the gross oppression of majorities. It will
echo a demand for beauty in life and of life, for the reasonable and
wholesome unit of human scale, for high values in ideal and in action,
for simplicity and distinction and a realization of true aristocracy.
Engendered of a new spiritual outlook, it may be fostered by the
compulsion of circumstance, for in spite of the brave front assumed
by those who even now are looking towards a future, it becomes daily
more apparent that the war has destroyed modern society and that in
spite of all the best intentions in the world it can never be restored.
The whole fabric of industrial civilization, already rotten at heart,
has collapsed; it could not save the world from universal war and it
possesses no power to enforce its own recuperation. In five years the
potential in men has been cut down by millions, an enormous amount
of machinery for production and transportation has been destroyed,
together with much arable land and many mines. The birth-rate steadily
decreases all over the world and with no evident prospect of a reversal
of the process. The debts of all the warring nations have reached
a point where in some cases the interest charges alone will almost
amount to the whole pre-war budget. The entire system of credit and
of international finance has become hopelessly disorganized and no
one has yet suggested any way in which it may adequately be restored.
Neither armistice nor peace has brought about even the beginnings of
industrial recovery; the demand is fabulous and acute, but the problems
of raw materials, transportation, credits, and of markets that will not
only take but also pay, are apparently unsolvable; meanwhile national
debts are still increasing through the payment of enormous amounts to
the unemployed.

To meet the crisis there is an unanimous cry for a resumption of
production, and for a vastly augmented output through increased
efficiency and more intensive methods, but the crying is in vain, for
meanwhile the working element has entered on a course of restriction
that will inevitably nullify every effort at increasing the output.
Partly through its pre-war victories in the contest with capital,
partly through the abnormal wage returns brought into being through
the desperation of the managers of the war, labour is now successfully
engaged in the work of cutting down production far below what it was
even ten years ago, both by reducing the hours of work and by vastly
augmenting the wage. The actual productivity of a “labour unit” today
is less than at any time since industrialism became the controlling
element in life, and in many categories it is less and less productive
of satisfactory results. Under these conditions it is hard to see just
how the reconstructionists expect to obtain that greatly increased
output they admit is the only visible hope of saving the world from
bankruptcy, chaos and barbarism.

The contest is an unfair one, for the entrance of Bolshevism has added
a new factor hitherto unknown. Enraged by the failure of strikes and
other war measures to improve their condition, labour is increasingly
turning to the small minority of avowed revolutionists who proclaim
the rather obvious fact that so long as industry is engineered by the
two antagonistic forces of capitalism and proletarianism, no permanent
improvement in the state of the latter is possible. Every increase in
wages is followed automatically by a greater increase in the cost of
living, and the ratio today between a wage of eighty cents an hour
and the cost of food, clothing and shelter, is less advantageous than
was the case when this sum represented not a wage per hour, but per
day. The reason for this state of things is not thought out with any
particular degree of exactness, and the leap is made in the dark to
revolution, confiscation and, of late, to Bolshevism. The ease with
which an insignificant, alien and unscrupulous minority has succeeded
in destroying society in Russia and Hungary, and the apparent ease with
which the same theory has almost been carried out in Germany, and may
be carried out in France and Italy--not to speak of North Dakota--has
aroused all the latent savagery and the impulse to revolt in large
sections of the working classes, but it has also completely terrorized
the politicians if not the capitalists themselves, and the menace of
anarchy is met cringingly and half-heartedly. It has even acquired a
strong if somewhat veiled defence among contemporary directors of human
destiny.

Were it not for the results of Bolshevism wherever it is being tried,
the situation might appear hopeless, for it begins to look very much
as though the attitude of labour, now apparently fixed, would make
impossible the industrial restoration on which statesmen, captains of
industry and high financiers count for the saving of the situation. If
this fails then there appears no escape from international bankruptcy
and a complete breakdown of the modern social system, with all this
implies of poverty, unemployment and even starvation. This is the
breeding-ground of Bolshevism, but the hope lies in the fact which is
becoming more apparent every day, that the thing is even worse for
the proletarian than for the capitalist or the man of culture and
education, the criminal being the only one that derives any profit
from the adventure. A few months more of Lenine, Trotsky and Bela Kun,
and the danger of Bolshevism will have passed, so far certainly as the
United States, Great Britain, France and Italy are concerned.

Yet with the removal of this peril the possibility of a social and
industrial breakdown still remains, and whether in anticipation
thereof, or as a forced expedient under sudden catastrophe, the Walled
Town offers itself as a means of solution, since it does not depend for
its existence on the maintenance or recovery of the pre-war industrial
system--rather on its rejection and reversal--while equally it is the
prophylactic against Bolshevism and its entire reversal.

And so the Walled Towns go back to an earlier age before modernism
began; back to the dim cities, the proud cities, the free cities of
centuries ago. They wall themselves against the world without, and
build up within their grey ramparts, and guard with their tall towers,
a life that is simpler and more beautiful and more joyful and more just
than that they had known and rejected because of its folly and its sin.
As, long ago, when the world became too gross or the terror of its
downfall too ominous, cell and hermitage, convent and monastery grew up
now here, now there, in secluded valleys, on inaccessible mountains,
in the barren and forgotten wilderness; as the solitary drew around
him first a handful, then a horde; as the damp cave or the wattled
hut gave way to multitudinous buildings and spacious cloisters and
the tall towers of enormous churches, so now, when time has come full
circle again, is all to be done over once more though after a different
fashion.

Men have despaired of redeeming a crumbling or recalcitrant world and
have gone out into the desert for the saving of their own souls, and
lo, the world followed and by them was saved. From each centre of
righteousness and beauty and salvation radiated circle after circle
of ever widening influence; the desert and the waste became orchard
and garden, the ribald and the lawless and the insolent came knocking
at the gates; soldier and bravo and king humbled their heads before
tonsured monk and mitred abbot. Ever wider waxed the increasing circles
until they touched, merged,--and the wonder was accomplished; ill had
come to an end and good had come into being.

So the Walled Towns, now when the need is clamorous again. Evil
imperial in scale cannot be blotted out by reform imperial in method.
The old way was the good way, the way of withdrawal and of temporary
isolation. “To your tents, O Israel!” Gather together the faithful and
them of like heart, building in the wilderness sanctuaries and Cities
of Refuge. The old ideals are indestructible; they survive through the
scorching of suns and the beating of tempests and as ever they are
omnipotent when they are rightly used. Not for long would the Walled
Towns stand aloof, and rampired against an alien and unkindly world,
for more and more would men be drawn within their magical circuits,
greater and ever greater would become their number, and at last the new
wonder would be accomplished and society once more redeemed.




TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


Obvious typos corrected, where they are supported by the same word in
the rest of the book. Note that there are several archaic terms used
that are not actually typos e.g. alarum, froward.

Apparent inconsistencies in hyphenation have been left unchanged.

“in other” corrected to “in another” on page 35.

Missing comma added on page 35: “the individual, the family, the State”.

Missing quotation mark added on page 74: “are bound to be present.”

“belongs” corrected to "belong" on page 92.

Excerpts of _The Decadent: Being the Gospel of Inaction_ are quoted in
the Prologue, after the thought break. The presentation of the excerpt
has been left unchanged from the original scan.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WALLED TOWNS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


